=pod

=for comment
$Id$
Note: indent all fixed-width paragraphs four spaces.

=for html
<style>
h1,h2,h3,h4 {font-family: sans-serif;}
h1 {font-size:1.3em; padding-top:0.25em;}
h2 {font-size:1.1em; padding-top:0.1em;}
h3 {font-size:1em; padding-top:0.1em;}
h4 {font-size:1em; font-style:italic; padding-top:0.1em;}
hr {width:0;}
dt {font-family: sans-serif; font-size:0.85em;}
dd {font-size:0.85em;}
.index {
  font-family: sans-serif;
  font-size: 0.8em;
  float: right;
  border: 1px solid #aaaaaa;
  background: #eeeeee;
  margin-left: 30px;
  margin-right: 10px; 
  padding-right: 20px;}
</style>


=head1 Nagiosgraph

Nagiosgraph is an add-on to Nagios.  Nagios monitors one or more services on
each host.  nagiosgraph extracts information from the Nagios output, processes
it, then inserts it into one or more round-robin database (RRD) files.  CGI
scripts display data from the RRD files as web pages.  The CGI output can be
embedded directly into Nagios so that graphs show up like other trend reports.

Installation is a three-step process.  First install the nagiosgraph files,
then configure Nagios for data collection, and finally customize the graphs
and links as needed.  Installation can be done manually by copying files and
modifying configuration files, or automatically using the install.pl script.

The INSTALL file contains basic installation instructions.

This README file contains detailed instructions for installing, upgrading,
customizing, troubleshooting, and managing performance data.

Answers to frequently asked questions are at:

=over 2

L<https://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/nagiosgraph>

=back

For help, visit the forum at:

=over 2

L<http://sourceforge.net/projects/nagiosgraph/forums/forum/394748>

=back



=head1 Copyright and License

 License: OSI Artistic License 2.0
 http://www.opensource.org/licenses/artistic-license-2.0

 Author: (c) 2005 Soren Dossing
 Author: (c) 2008 Alan Brenner, Ithaka Harbors
 Author: (c) 2010 Matthew Wall

 Nagios is a registered trademark of Ethan Galstad.


=head1 Principles of Operation

nagiosgraph is a simple interface between Nagios and RRD files.

nagiosgraph operates in two modes. One is to collect performance data
from Nagios servicechecks, and the other is to display graphs of
the performance data collected.

All the data collected are stored in RRD files using rrdtool. A file
called 'map' defines how to identify the data from Nagios and how to
store them in the RRD files. Nagios passes all the service data to a
nagiosgraph script called 'insert.pl'. This script uses the file 'map'
to determine how to name the data and into which RRD files to insert
the data. The map file also processes the data, for example by changing
units or applying scaling factors.

The 'map' file is actually perl code, that is eval'ed by 'insert.pl'.
The map file contains a general rule that will capture the performance
data from most plugins. However, it may be necessary to add entries to
match the output of some Nagios plugins. Several examples of servicechecks
are included in the distributed map file. Knowing perl regular expression
is helpful, but the examples supplied should cover most types of
performance data.

For graphing, nagiosgraph includes cgi scripts. 'show.cgi' looks up
performance data for a single host and service, and generates line
charts accordingly.  Other scripts display all hosts for a specific
service, all services for a specific host, or arbitrary groups of hosts
and services.  These run out-of-the-box with minimal configuration, or
they can be customized, using a configuration file or interactively.

Graphs can be integrated into Nagios using Nagios' extended information
for services and hosts.  By specifying nagiosgraph cgi scripts in the
Nagios configuration, individual graphs and collections of graphs can be
linked directly to hosts and services in Nagios web pages.

By default, all available data for a servicecheck will be displayed in
the same graph. With extra configuration, either embedded in the url, 
specified in a configuration file, or using controls in a web page, it is
possible to display less data or to split values into multiple graphs.
There is also a general method for specifying arbitrary RRD graph
options such as line style, color, and scaling for individual hosts or
services.



=head1 Installation Preliminaries

Before installing, ensure that the prerequisite software has been installed
then decide upon a layout and location.


=head2 Prerequisites

Nagiosgraph will not function without a working Nagios installation, so
first ensure that Nagios works.  Version 3.2 or later is recommended, but
older versions will also work.

Nagiosgraph requires rrdtool.  Version 1.4 or later is recommended, but
older versions will also work.

Nagiosgraph requires the CGI and RRDs perl modules.  The RRDs perl module
is part of rrdtool but is often distributed as a separate package.  The GD
perl module is optional, but recommended.  The Nagios::Object perl module is
optional, but useful for automatic configuration of showgroup.cgi.

Debian/Ubuntu:

    apt-get install libcgi-pm-perl librrds-perl
    apt-get install libgd-gd2-perl libnagios-object-perl

Redhat/Fedora/CentOS:

    yum install perl-rrdtool perl-GD

SUSE:

    rrdtool, perl-GD

Solaris:

    rrdtool, gd

FreeBSD:

    rrdtool, gd

OpenBSD:

    p5-RRD, p5-GD

The install.pl script includes an option to check for pre-requisites:

    install.pl --check-prereq  


=head2 Layout and Location

There are two standard layouts: separate or overlay.  The separated layout
has nagiosgraph and Nagios in separate directories.  The overlay places
nagiosgraph components with Nagios components.

Nagios and nagiosgraph can be installed in just about any location, for
example /opt or /usr/local.

Redhat (Fedora, CentOS), SUSE, and Debian (Ubuntu) systems have their own
layouts.  If you installed Nagios from a package, you can overlay nagiosgraph
or you can install nagiosgraph to its own standalone location.

When installing from source, the standalone layout is highly recommended
since it makes updates much easier.

Decide upon a location and layout before you start the installation.
Examples are in the Sample Installation Layouts section.


=head2 Installation Methods

There are a few ways to install nagiosgraph: manual, script, and package.
On most systems the installation requires root permissions, so either do
the installation as root or preface commands with sudo.

=head3 Manual Installation

Copy and edit files directly.  Follow the recipe in the INSTALL file, or
the instructions in these sections of this file:

=over

=item *

L</"Installing nagiosgraph Files"> - nagiosgraph installation

=item *

L</"Configuring Data Processing"> - Nagios configuration

=item *

L</"Configuring Graphing and Display"> - Apache and Nagios configuration

=back

=head3 Install Script

Run the install.pl script.  It will prompt you for the parameters it
needs, then it will copy and configure nagiosgraph files. It will also
prompt you to modify apache and Nagios configuration files.

    install.pl --prefix=/usr/local/nagiosgraph
    install.pl --help

=head3 Installation Using Packages

The nagiosgraph packages assume that Nagios and apache were installed
from packages.  Do not use a nagiosgraph package if you installed Nagios
or apache from source!

Debian, Ubuntu

    dpkg -i nagiosgraph-x.y.z.deb

Redhat, Fedora, CentOS, SUSE

    rpm -i nagiosgraph-x.y.z.rpm



=head1 Installing nagiosgraph Files

These instructions assume a standalone layout, with Nagios at /usr/local/nagios
and nagiosgraph at /usr/local/nagiosgraph

=over

=item 1.

Create destination directories:

    mkdir /usr/local/nagiosgraph
    mkdir /usr/local/nagiosgraph/bin
    mkdir /usr/local/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin
    mkdir /usr/local/nagiosgraph/etc
    mkdir /usr/local/nagiosgraph/share

=item 2.

Extract nagiosgraph into a temporary location:

    cd /tmp
    tar xzvf nagiosgraph-x.y.z.tgz

=item 3.

Copy the contents of etc into your preferred configuration location:

    cp etc/* /usr/local/nagiosgraph/etc

=item 4.

Edit the perl scripts in the cgi and lib directories, modifying the
"use lib" line to point to the directory from the previous step.

    vi cgi/*.cgi lib/insert.pl

=item 5.

Copy insert.pl to a location from which it can be executed:

    cp lib/insert.pl /usr/local/nagiosgraph/bin

=item 6.

Copy CGI scripts to a script directory served by the web server:

    cp cgi/*.cgi /usr/local/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin

=item 7.

Copy CSS and JavaScript files to a directory served by the web server:

    cp share/nagiosgraph.css /usr/local/nagiosgraph/share
    cp share/nagiosgraph.js /usr/local/nagiosgraph/share

=item 8.

Edit nagiosgraph.conf.  Set at least the following:

    logfile           = /var/log/nagiosgraph.log
    cgilogfile        = /var/log/nagiosgraph-cgi.log
    perflog           = /var/nagios/perfdata.log
    rrddir            = /var/nagios/rrd
    mapfile           = /usr/local/nagiosgraph/etc/map
    nagiosgraphcgiurl = /nagiosgraph/cgi-bin
    javascript        = /nagiosgraph/nagiosgraph.js
    stylesheet        = /nagiosgraph/nagiosgraph.css

=item 9.

Set permissions of "rrddir" (as defined in nagiosgraph.conf) so that
the *nagios* user can write to it and the *www* user can read it:

    mkdir /var/nagios/rrd
    chown nagios /var/nagios/rrd
    chmod 755 /var/nagios/rrd

=item 10.

Set permissions of "logfile" so that the *nagios* user can write to it:

    touch /var/log/nagiosgraph.log
    chown nagios /var/log/nagiosgraph.log
    chmod 644 /var/log/nagiosgraph.log

=item 11.

Set permissions of "cgilogfile" so that the *www* user can write to it:

    touch /var/log/nagiosgraph-cgi.log
    chown www /var/log/nagiosgraph-cgi.log
    chmod 644 /var/log/nagiosgraph-cgi.log

=item 12.

Ensure that the *nagios* user can create and delete perfdata files:

    chown nagios /var/nagios
    chmod 755 /var/nagios

=back


=head1 Upgrade Notes


=over

=item *

Follow the steps for a new installation, but keep your customizations.
Your changes should be limited to the map file (map), configuration
files (nagiosgraph.conf and other .conf files), and the stylesheet
(nagiosgraph.css).

=item *

Use diff, or a similar tool, to update your nagiosgraph.conf with any new
fields from etc/nagiosgraph.conf

=item *

Use diff, or a similar tool, to update your nagiosgraph.css with changes
from share/nagiosgraph.css.

=item *

You may want to look at etc/map or the files in the examples directory
to see if there are any map rules or CSS useful to your configuration.

=item *

If you change from immediate processing to batch processing, be sure to
comment out service_perfdata_command in the Nagios configuration.

=item *

Be sure to install the nagiosgraph.js and nagiosgraph.css files, especially
if you are upgrading from nagiosgraph older than 1.2.

=item *

If you are upgrading from nagiosgraph 1.4.1 or earlier, move your service
and database/datasource labels from nagiosgraph.conf to labels.conf.

=item *

If you are upgrading from nagiosgraph 1.4.3 or earlier and you were using
nagios3 for the authzmethod, you must replace authz_nagios_cfg and
authz_cgi_cfg with authzfile.  All of the Nagios authorization parameters
should be in the Nagios CGI configuration file (typically cgi.cfg).

=item *

If you are upgrading from nagiosgraph 1.4.3 or earlier, you might want to
add the generic map rule to the end of your map file.  This rule will
catch performance data from any additional plugins you add.  Using the
generic rule results in RRD files with the following structure, one file
per named performance data element, with one or more data sources:

    host0/service___label (data[,warn][,crit][,min][,max])

=item *

If you are upgrading from nagiosgraph 1.4.3 or earlier, you should make any
ignore map rules explicit.  For example, in the map file change this:

    /output:CHECK_NRPE: Socket timeout/
    and return;

to this:

    /output:CHECK_NRPE: Socket timeout/
    and return ('ignore');

=back


=head1 Configuring Data Processing

Before nagiosgraph can graph anything it must first collect data.  There are
two ways to process data - batch and immediate.  Batch processing is usually
appropriate for most Nagios deployments.  Immediate processing typically
requires more CPU and I/O.

In batch processing, performance data are appended to a file, then Nagios
invokes insert.pl at a regular interval to update the RRD files.

In immediate processing, Nagios invokes insert.pl immediately after each
service check, thus updating the corresponding RRD files.


=head2 Batch Processing

=over

=item 1.

In the Nagios configuration file (nagios.cfg) set:

    process_performance_data=1
    service_perfdata_file=/var/nagios/perfdata.log
    service_perfdata_file_template=$LASTSERVICECHECK$||$HOSTNAME$||$SERVICEDESC$||$SERVICEOUTPUT$||$SERVICEPERFDATA$
    service_perfdata_file_mode=a
    service_perfdata_file_processing_interval=30
    service_perfdata_file_processing_command=process-service-perfdata

Make sure that service_perfdata_command is either commented out
or not defined.

Make sure that location of service_perfdata_file matches that of perflog
defined in nagiosgraph.conf.

=item 2.

In the Nagios commands file (commands.cfg) define
the process-service-perfdata command:

    define command {
      command_name  process-service-perfdata
      command_line  /usr/local/nagiosgraph/bin/insert.pl
    }

Make sure there is only one definition for process-service-perfdata.

Older versions of Nagios used checkcommands.cfg or misccommands.cfg.

=item 3.

Check the Nagios configuration

    /usr/local/nagios/bin/nagios -v /usr/local/nagios/etc/nagios.cfg

=item 4.

Restart Nagios

    /etc/init.d/nagios restart

=back


=head2 Immediate Processing

=over

=item 1.

In nagios.cfg:

    process_performance_data=1
    service_perfdata_command=process-service-perfdata

Make sure that service_perfdata_file_processing_command is either
commented out or not defined.

=item 2.

In commands.cfg:

    define command{
      command_name  process-service-perfdata
      command_line  /usr/local/nagiosgraph/bin/insert.pl "$LASTSERVICECHECK$||$HOSTNAME$||$SERVICEDESC$||$SERVICEOUTPUT$||$SERVICEPERFDATA$"
    }

=item 3.

Check the Nagios configuration

    /usr/local/nagios/bin/nagios -v /usr/local/nagios/etc/nagios.cfg

=item 4.

Restart Nagios

    /etc/init.d/nagios restart

=back


=head1 Configuring Graphing and Display

First configure the web server to run the nagiosgraph CGI scripts.  For
example, with Apache do something like this in the Apache configuration:

    ScriptAlias /nagiosgraph/cgi-bin /usr/local/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin
    <Directory "/usr/local/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin">
       Options ExecCGI
       AllowOverride None
       Order allow,deny
       Allow from all
    </Directory>
    Alias /nagiosgraph "/usr/local/nagiosgraph/share"
    <Directory "/usr/local/nagiosgraph/share">
       Options None
       AllowOverride None
       Order allow,deny
       Allow from all
    </Directory>

Restart the web server:

    /etc/init.d/apache2 restart

Verify that nagiosgraph is working by running showconfig.cgi

    http://server/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/showconfig.cgi

Try graphing some data by running show.cgi

    http://server/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/show.cgi

This should display a web page with a list of your hosts and services.
Note that it might take a few minutes for data to collect, so at first the
list of hosts and services might be sparse and the graphs might be empty.

There are a few ways to embed graphs into Nagios.  In the service and
host listings, Nagios will display graph icons that, when clicked, will
open a new web page with graphs.  These icons are typically per-host
(linked to the showhost.cgi script) or per-host-service (linked to the
show.cgi script).  Nagios will display graph data when the mouse is moved
over the graph icon for each host/service.  Finally, graphs can be displayed
directly in the Nagios frames.  The following sections explain how to do each
of these.



=head2 Displaying Per-Service and Per-Host Graph Icons and Links in Nagios

Links to graphs can be embedded in Nagios status pages using the notes or
actions fields.  The specifics depend on the Nagios version as well as how
you have configured your host and service definitions.  Nagios 2 uses the
serviceextinfo and hostextinfo construct.  In Nagios 3 the nagiosgraph
additions go directly in the host and service definitions.

To display a graph icon instead of the Nagios action icon, replace
nagios/images/action.gif with graph.gif from the nagiosgraph distribution.

In its default configuration, Nagios will create a new window for each
action or notes link.  To display graphs in the Nagios frame instead of
a new window, set action_url_target=main in the Nagios cgi.cfg file.

=head3 For Nagios 2.6 and Earlier

If you have these lines in nagios.cfg, un-comment the 2 cfg_file= lines:

    # Extended host/service info definitions are now stored along with
    # other object definitions:
    # cfg_file=/etc/nagios/hostextinfo.cfg
    # cfg_file=/etc/nagios/serviceextinfo.cfg

Otherwise, define in cgi.cfg the following:

    xedtemplate_config_file=/usr/local/nagios/etc/serviceextinfo.cfg

Edit/Create hostextinfo.cfg

    define hostextinfo {
      host_name  your-host
      action_url /nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/showhost.cgi?host=$HOSTNAME$
    }

This must be the host you will use in serviceextinfo.cfg

Edit/Create serviceextinfo.cfg

    define serviceextinfo {
      service_description  DNS
      hostgroup       servers
      notes_url       /nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/show.cgi?host=$HOSTNAME$&service=$SERVICEDESC$
      icon_image      graph.gif
      icon_image_alt  View graphs
    }

=head3 For Nagios 2.9 and Nagios 3

Use the action_url for any existing host or service definition.  For example,

    define service {
      name NTP
      use local-service
      action_url /nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/show.cgi?host=$HOSTNAME$&service=$SERVICEDESC$
      ...
    }

    define host {
      host_name web-server
      action_url /nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/showhost.cgi?host=$HOSTNAME$
      ...
    }

To apply graph links to multiple services, define a template such as this:

    define service {
      name graphed-service
      action_url /nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/show.cgi?host=$HOSTNAME$&service=$SERVICEDESC$
      register 0
    }

Then use it in services like this:

    define service {
      name NTP
      use local-service,graphed-service
      ...
    }



=head2 Displaying Graphs in Nagios Mouseovers

To display graphs as mouseovers for each host and/or service, do the following:

=over

=item 1.

Edit the file share/nagiosgraph.ssi to contain the URL to the nagiosgraph
javascript file (e.g. /nagiosgraph/nagiosgraph.js)

=item 2.

If you have not customized the Nagios SSI, copy share/nagiosgraph.ssi to
the Nagios ssi directory, and rename it so that Nagios will insert it into
each page.  For example:

    cp share/nagiosgraph.ssi /usr/local/nagios/share/ssi/common-header.ssi

If you have customized Nagios SSI, add the contents of
share/nagiosgraph.ssi to your customized SSI header file.

=item 3.

Configure services to display graphs on mouseovers by adding some 
JavaScript to action_url or notes_url.  For example:

    define service {
      name NTP
      use local-service
      action_url /nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/show.cgi?host=$HOSTNAME$&service=$SERVICEDESC$' onMouseOver='showGraphPopup(this)' onMouseOut='hideGraphPopup()' rel='/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/showgraph.cgi?host=$HOSTNAME$&service=$SERVICEDESC$
      ...
    }

This example displays a week of data in a popup with no legend:

    define service {
      name NTP
      use local-service
      action_url /nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/show.cgi?host=$HOSTNAME$&service=$SERVICEDESC$' onMouseOver='showGraphPopup(this)' onMouseOut='hideGraphPopup()' rel='/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/showgraph.cgi?host=$HOSTNAME$&service=$SERVICEDESC$&period=week&rrdopts=-w+450+-j
      ...
    }

=back

You must restart Nagios for changes to service/host defintions to take effect.

If a service includes multiple data sources, use the datasetdb file (specified
in nagiosgraph.conf) to indicate which data sources should be displayed by
default for each service, or specify the data source(s) explicity in each
action_url.



=head2 Displaying Graphs in Nagios Frames

To embed nagiosgraph graphs directly into Nagios, do the following:

Modify side.php (e.g. /usr/local/nagios/share/side.php) by inserting
bullets under the 'Trends' heading:

    <li><a href="<?php echo $cfg["cgi_base_url"];?>/trends.cgi" target="<?php echo $link_target;?>">Trends</a>
    <ul>
    <li><a href="<?php echo $cfg["cgi_base_url"];?>/show.cgi" target="<?php echo $link_target;?>">Graphs</a></li>
    <li><a href="<?php echo $cfg["cgi_base_url"];?>/showhost.cgi" target="<?php echo $link_target;?>">Graphs by Host</a></li>
    <li><a href="<?php echo $cfg["cgi_base_url"];?>/showservice.cgi" target="<?php echo $link_target;?>">Graphs by Service</a></li>
    <li><a href="<?php echo $cfg["cgi_base_url"];?>/showgroup.cgi" target="<?php echo $link_target;?>">Graphs by Group</a></li>
    </ul>
    </li>

If you keep the nagiosgraph cgi scripts in a location different than
the Nagios cgi scripts, then use 'ng_cgi_base_url' rather than
'cgi_base_url' and make an entry in config.inc.php such as this:

    $cfg['cgi_base_url']='/nagios/cgi-bin';
    $cfg['ng_cgi_base_url']='/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin';

Some Nagios installations have side.html instead of side.php:

    <li><a href="/nagios/cgi-bin/trends.cgi" target="main">Trends</a>
    <ul>
    <li><a href="/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/show.cgi" target="main">Graphs</a></li>
    <li><a href="/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/showhost.cgi" target="main">Graphs by Host</a></li>
    <li><a href="/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/showservice.cgi" target="main">Graphs by Service</a></li>
    <li><a href="/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/showgroup.cgi" target="main">Graphs by Group</a></li>
    </ul>
    </li>



=head1 Customizing the Graphs

The look and feel of nagiosgraph is controlled by the cascading style sheets
defined in nagiosgraph.css.  The examples directory contains a stylesheet file
with sample style sheets for fixing the controls to the page, floating the
controls above the graphs, or hiding the controls altogether.

Graphs can be customized individually by specifying CGI arguments, or they
can be customized overall by specifying values in the configuration files.
Some parameters apply to each page, others apply to each service, and others
apply to each data source.

The following CGI arguments are recognized by show.cgi, showhost.cgi,
showservice.cgi, and showgroup.cgi:

=over 16

=item hidengtitle

Do not display the nagiosgraph title in the page.

=item geom=WxH

Set the dimensions of all graphs to W pixels wide and H pixels tall.

=item showtitle

Display a title next to each graph.

=item showdesc

Display a description of data sources next to each graph.

=item showgraphtitle

Display a title in each graph.

=item graphonly

Display only graph data, not axes, grid, or legend.

=item hidelegend

Do not display the legend in each graph.

=item fixedscale

Set the Y-axis to be in the same scale as the performance data.  This is useful
to prevent a variety of vertical scales when autoscaling results in different
vertical scaling for each graph.

=back

The following options are available via configuration files:

=over 16

=item rrdopts

Use the rrdopts option to specify custom RRD graphing options.  These can be
specified for all graphs using rrdopts, or per-service using the rrdoptsfile.

=item lineformat

Use lineformat to control the line thickness and line color for individual data
sources.  The alpha channel is respected if a recent version of rrdtool is
installed.

=item plotas, plotasLINE1, plotasLINE2, plotasLINE3, plotasAREA, plotasTICK

Use plotas to control the line thickness/style for individual data sources.

=item stack

Create stacked area graphs using the stack directive for individual data
sources, the STACK directive in lineformat, or by adjusting the alpha
channel in specified colors.

=back

Some services emit multiple data sources with big differences in magnitude.
Others emit data with different units.  In such cases, split the data
into seperate graphs by specifying one or more data sources.  For example,
for the NTP service, jitter and offset are typically in the same range,
while stratum is orders of magnitude larger.  So we specify two
different graphs:

    show.cgi?host=HOST&service=NTP&db=ntp,jitter&db=ntp,offset
    show.cgi?host=HOST&service=NTP&db=ntp,stratum

This assumes that jitter, offset, and stratum are all stored in a
single RRD file using a map entry such as:

    /output:NTP.*Offset ([-.0-9]+).*jitter ([-.0-9]+).*stratum (\d+)/
    and push @s, [ 'ntp',
                   [ 'offset',  GAUGE, $1      ],
                   [ 'jitter',  GAUGE, $2/1000 ],
                   [ 'stratum', GAUGE, $3+1    ] ];

Data are identified by host, service, database, and data source.  It is
possible to graph all sources from a single database, a single source
from a database, selected sources from a single database, or selected
sources from multiple databases.  In each case, the host and service
must match.  For example:

    showgraph.cgi?host=HOST&service=SERVICE&db=loss
    showgraph.cgi?hsot=HOST&service=SERVICE&db=loss,losspct
    showgraph.cgi?host=HOST&service=SERVICE&db=ntp,jitter,offset
    showgraph.cgi?host=HOST&service=SERVICE&db=loss,losspct&db=rta,rta

These options apply to showgraph.cgi, show.cgi, and showservice.cgi and
in the configuration files hostdb.conf, groupdb.conf, and datasetdb.conf.

Use URLs as canned queries.  For example, define a 'temperatures'
group in the groupdb.conf file that combines temperature data from
multiple hosts and service types, then create a link to that group:

    http://server/cgi-bin/showgroup.cgi?group=temperatures

See the configuration files for more options and examples.



=head1 Adding Service Types

Service types are added by creating rules in the 'map' file.  The map file
determines how data from Nagios will be stored.  Each rule determines how
output and performance data should be recorded.

The map file contains regular expressions to identify service types
and define content in RRD files. All entries are written in perl, so 
editing, adding or deleting entries requires some perl programming 
knowledge. Knowledge of RRD is also helpful.

There has to be one entry for each type of service. The map file included 
with nagiosgraph has several examples for cpu, memory, disk, network etc.
Most examples identify data from either Nagios output or Nagios perfdata
then define a number of RRD data sources.  There is also a generic rule
that will capture output from any plugin that adheres to the Nagios standards
for plugin performance data.

insert.pl receives data from Nagios.  It formats data into a string consisting
of four lines of text.  This string might look like this:

    hostname:host0
    servicedesc:ping
    output:PING OK - Packet loss = 0%, RTA = 0.00 ms
    perfdata:

Or like this:

    hostname:host0
    servicedesc:CPU Load 
    output:OK - load average: 0.06, 0.12, 0.10
    perfdata:load1=0;15;30;0 load5=0;10;25;0 load15=0;5;20;0 

The official perfdata format is a space-delimited list of qualified
name-value pairs with this format:

    name=value[units];[warn];[crit];[min];[max]

where units is one of:

                     - unitless
             s,us,ms - time
                   % - percentage
    B,KB,MB,GB,TB,PB - bytes
                   c - counter

However, the perfdata is not always set, and the format of perfdata varies
a great deal from plugin to plugin.  So depending on type of service, the
most useful data can be in either the output or perfdata line.

For the ping example above, data can be extracted from the output line 
with a regular expression like this:

    /output:PING.*?(\d+)%.+?([.\d]+)\sms/

In this case, two values are extracted and available in $1 and $2. We can 
then create a data structure describing the content of the database. The 
general format is

    [ db-name,
      [ DS-name, TYPE, DS-value ],
      [ DS-name, TYPE, DS-value ],
      ...
    ]

Where DS name is the name that will be assigned to a line showing on RRD 
graphs. Each DS name must be no longer than 19 characters and must contain
only the characters A-Z, a-z, 0-9, or underscore.  TYPE is either GAUGE or
DERIVE. the DS value is the data extracted in the regular expression. The
DS value can be an expression, for example to normalize to SI units.

Each database definition must be added to the @s array.

So the complete code to define and insert into an RRD file for the 
PING example above, becomes:

    /output:PING.*?(\d+)%.+?([.\d]+)\sms/
    and push @s, [ ping,
                  [ losspct, GAUGE, $1      ],
                  [ rta,     GAUGE, $2/1000 ] ];

In this case the database name is called 'ping' and the DS-names stored 
are losspct and rta. The Nagios output reports round trip time in 
milliseconds, so the value is divided by 1000 to convert to seconds. 
The type for each DS is GAUGE.

Be careful about the database names and DS names. In the code example 
above the names are barewords, which only works as long as the don't 
conflict with perl functions or subroutines. For example the word 'sleep' 
will not work without quoting.

A safer version of the above example is

    /output:PING.*?(\d+)%.+?([.\d]+)\sms/
    and push @s, [ 'ping',
                  [ 'losspct', 'GAUGE', $1      ],
                  [ 'rta',     'GAUGE', $2/1000 ] ];

After editing the map file, the syntax can be checked with

    perl -c map

Again a word of caution. If the map file has syntax errors, nothing will be 
inserted into RRD files until the file is fixed. So do not edit production 
map files. Instead do something like this:

    cp map map.edit
    vi map.edit
    perl -c map.edit
    mv map.edit map

Use testentry.pl to test a rule before putting it into production.  First run
the Nagios check command from the command line to see what is returned.  Copy
this output and paste it into testentry.pl.  Paste the rule into testentry.pl.
Run testentry.pl to see how the output will be handled.

Changes to the map file generally do not require a restart of Nagios.

It may take awhile for data from a map entry to show up in an RRD file.
This is partly due to the service check scheduling in Nagios, and partly
due to the perfdata buffering of service_perfdata_file_processing_interval

Increase debug level in nagiosgraph.conf to see what is happening.
The debug_insert parameter determines the log level for collecting data.
Output will go to the nagiosgraph log file.  Keep an eye on the log file;
it can grow big.  Perhaps rotate it, or decrease log level when everything
works.

Share your work. If you have a good map file entry for standard Nagios 
plugins, then please post it on the forum.



=head1 Managing Data and RRD Files

nagiosgraph saves data in RRD files in the rrddir directory (specified in
nagiosgraph.conf).  By default, nagiosgraph uses a directory for each host,
and the RRD files are named based on the service description (from Nagios)
and the data names (from the map file).  For example, the default 
configuration for the PING service results in RRD files like this:

    /var/nagiosgraph/rrd/host/PING___pingloss.rrd
    /var/nagiosgraph/rrd/host/PING___pingrta.rrd

Older versions of nagiosgraph kept all RRD files in a single directory.
This is controlled by the dbseparator variable in nagiosgraph.conf.

Use the 'dump' and 'restore' options to rrdtool if you need to restructure
RRD files.  You might want to split data from a single RRD file into 
multiple files, or you might want to combine data from multiple RRD files
into a single file.  Or you might simply want to change the name of a 
data source.  The dump option will emit data in XML format:

    rrdtool dump service___db.rrd > service_db.xml

You can modify the XML with any text editor, then convert to RRD format:

    rrdtool restore service_db.xml service___db-new.rrd

Unfortunately the RRD file schema is not dynamic.  If an RRD file is created
with 2 data sources, more data sources cannot be added automatically.  For
example, you start recording UPS temperature to an RRD file using the
following map rule:

    /perfdata:temperature=([.\d]+)/
    and push @s, [ 'temp',
                   [ 'temperature', GAUGE, $1 ] ];

Later you decide to include critical and warning temperatures using this
map rule:

    /perfdata:temperature=([.\d]+);([.\d]+);([.\d]+)/
    and push @s, [ 'temp',
                   [ 'temperature', GAUGE, $1 ],
                   [ 'warn',  GAUGE, $2 ],
                   [ 'crit',  GAUGE, $3 ] ];

The new rule will still record temperature, but critical and warning values
will be discarded, because they are not defined in the RRD file.  You must do
a dump/edit/restore on the RRD file if you want to add critical/warning while
maintaining existing temperature data.  Alternatively you can simply delete
the existing RRD file and let the new map rule create the new RRD file.

What is the 'right' way to configure RRD files?  Should all data from a single
service go into a single RRD file?  Should each RRD file contain a single set
of data?  Some best practices have evolved over the past 10 years, but as of
this writing (febrary 2010) there is no single 'right' way.

Some people prefer to put all data from a single service into a single RRD
file, even if the data have different units.  For example, for the PING 
service their RRD files look something like this:

    PING___ping.rrd (losspct, losswarn, losscrit, rta, rtawarn, rtacrit)

Others prefer a separate file for each data source:

    PING___losspct.rrd (losspct)
    PING___losswarn.rrd (losswarn)
    PING___losscrit.rrd (losscrit)
    PING___rta.rrd (rta)
    PING___rtawarn.rrd (rtawarn)
    PING___rtacrit.rrd (rtacrit)

And others prefer something in between:

    PING___loss.rrd (losspct, losswarn, losscrit)
    PING___rta.rrd (rta, rtawarn, rtacrit)

It is a good idea to plan your configuration before you start recording data.
Although it is possible to reconfigure data after the RRD files are full,
doing so is somewhat tedious, especially for large numbers of hosts/services.

The 1.4.4 release of nagiosgraph added a generic map rule that matches any
standard performance data.  This rule puts the data into RRD files using this
structure:

    host0/service___label.rrd     (data[,warn][,crit][,min][,max])

For example, for service0 with 3 perfdata labels and service1 with 1 perfdata
labels, the rule generates the following RRD files:

    host0/service0___label0.rrd   (data[,warn][,crit][,min][,max])
    host0/service0___label1.rrd   (data[,warn][,crit][,min][,max])
    host0/service0___label2.rrd   (data[,warn][,crit][,min][,max])
    host0/service1___label0.rrd   (data[,warn][,crit][,min][,max])

There are a few rrdtool parameters that affect size of the RRD files and the
resolution of data:

    stepsize
    resolution
    heartbeat
    step

These parameters are used only when an RRD file is created.  By default they
are the same for all hosts and services, but they can be specified for
individual hosts, services, and or databases in the nagiosgraph configuration
file.  To modify these values for an existing RRD file you must do a
dump/edit/restore.  See the rrdtool documentation for details.



=head1 Managing RRD Parameters

The most important parameters are stepsize, heartbeat, and sampling interval.
A typical sign that these parameters are not set correctly is values of NaN
in the RRD files, which manifests as gaps in the graphs or empty graphs.

A good rule of thumb is to use a heartbeat that is twice the sampling interval
and a stepsize equal to the sampling interval.

In a default nagiosgraph configuration, the same parameters are applied to all
hosts and services.  However, they can be specified for individual hosts and
services if necessary.

The stepsize, in seconds, defines the nominal amount of time between data
points. The default value is 300 (5 minutes). The heartbeat, in seconds,
defines the amount of time between updates before a data point should be
considered unknown. The default value is 600 (10 minutes).  The resolution
defines how many data points should be kept. The step defines how data points
are consolidated. The xfiles factor defines how unknown data points are
considered when consolidating data.  These parameters are specified in the
nagiosgraph configuration file.

The sampling interval is defined in Nagios (check_interval).  This defines
how often a service will be checked.

These values are used only when an RRD file is created. To change the
stepsize, heartbeat, or resolution of an existing RRD, one must dump the
RRD file to XML, modify the data, then restore the RRD file.  Or simply
delete the RRD file and let nagiosgraph create a new one.



=head1 Configuring Access Controls

nagiosgraph does authorization (authz), not authentication (authn).  Access
is granted or denied to users for specific services and hosts.  There
are two ways to configure authorization: using Nagios configuration files
or using a standalone nagiosgraph configuration file.

To use Nagios access controls, define the following in nagiosgraph.conf:

    authzmethod=nagios3
    authzfile=/etc/nagios/cgi.cfg

nagiosgraph respects the following Nagios variables:

    use_authentication
    default_user_name
    authorized_for_all_hosts
    authorized_for_all_services

To use nagiosgraph access controls, define the following in nagiosgraph.conf:

    authzmethod=nagiosgraph
    authzfile=/usr/local/nagiosgraph/etc/access.conf

The nagiosgraph access control file uses the following syntax:

    host,service=user[,user[,...]]

Wildcards are permitted to match hosts, services, or users.  The exclamation
character negates permissions for a user.  For example:

    *=                 # deny access to everyone for all hosts and services
    *=*                # grant access to everyone for all hosts and services
    host1=guest        # grant access to guest for all services on host1
    host1,ping=!guest  # deny access to guest for ping on host1
    *,ping=guest       # grant access to guest for ping on any host
    *.foo.com=guest    # grant access to guest for any host in foo.com

Permissions are respected by all nagiosgraph CGI scripts, so you can safely
distribute URLs for specific graphs or reports.



=head1 Troubleshooting

First identify whether your problem is with data collection or data display.

Are perfdata being collected by Nagios?  Run a Nagios plugin directly and
make sure that it is working properly.  For example:

    check_ping -H host -w 100,10% -c 200,20%

Are permissions set correctly?  The nagios user must be able to write to
the rrd directory.  The nagios user must be able to write to the nagiosgraph
log file.  The web server user must be able to write to the nagiosgraph cgi
log file (which might be the same as the nagiosgraph log file for older
nagiosgraph installations).  If the web server user does not have permission
to modify the log file, nagiosgraph cgi logging will end up in the web server
error log.

Is nagiosgraph running?  In nagiosgraph.conf, set debug_insert=5 then look
at the nagiosgraph log file.  You should see messages from insert.pl.  Ensure
that insert.pl is being called as expected, either periodically by Nagios or
in a loop.

Are the RRD files being created?  The nagios user must have write permission
on the rrd directory.

Are the RRD files being modified?  Check the RRD file timestamp.

Are data being saved into RRD files?  With debug_insert=3, look in the
nagiosgraph log file for errors or warnings from insert.pl.  Problems with
map rules should be reported in the log file.  If necessary, increase the
log level to debug_insert=5.

Are the RRD file contents sane?  Use 'rrdtool dump filename.rrd'.  It is
normal for a new RRD file to be full of NaN.  As the file is updated those
should be replaced with proper values.  Ensure that the data source names in
the RRD file correspond to the names in the map rule.

Are there old or unused RRD files lying about?  Older versions of nagiosgraph
can be confused by multiple RRD files with the same data source for a single
host.  If you change the map rule for a service, you might want to move the
old RRD files out of the rrd directory.

If graphs are not being displayed, start by graphing a single host and service
with showgraph.cgi, for example showgraph.cgi?host=HOST&service=SERVICE.  Set
debug_showgraph=3 in nagiosgraph.conf, then look for output in the nagiosgraph
log file or the web server error log.

Be aware of what you are asking nagiosgraph to display.  Start with just a
host and service, then get more specific.  For example, each of these queries
will result in a different graph:

    show.cgi?host=HOST&service=PING
    show.cgi?host=HOST&service=PING&db=ping
    show.cgi?host=HOST&service=PING&db=ping,losspct,losswarn

To isolate problems in individual CGI scripts, use debug_show (show.cgi), 
debug_showhost (showhost.cgi), debug_showservice (showservice.cgi), or
debug_showgroup (showgroup.cgi) as appropriate.

For installations with many hosts and services, use the host/service
extensions when setting the log level (e.g. debug_showgraph_host = host)
to make the log information easier to grok.



=head1 Internationalization

Translations are in a single file, with one file per language.  Strings for
both the cgi and javascript are in the same file.  The javascript translations
and language detection are controlled by the cgi scripts.

In order to minimize dependencies and overhead, nagiosgraph uses its own
system for internationalization.  It has a syntax similar to gettext.
Strings are defined in english within the perl and javascript code.  There
is no support for complex lexical structures - only string literals.  The
user interface to nagiosgraph is (so far) simple enough that this suffices.

To create a new translation, copy an existing translation file to a file
with the appropriate extension.  For example, nagiosgraph_es.conf is the
file for generic spanish.

Error messages are not translated.

Language is detected from the HTTP_ACCEPT_LANGUAGE environment variable.  The
first language in this list is the language used.  If a language is specified
in the nagiosgraph configuration file, that language overrides anything in
the environment.

The language can be specified as an argument to each cgi script, for example:

    show.cgi?language=es

Language specified in this manner overrides any environment or configuration.



=head1 Enumeration of Files

=over

=item CHANGELOG

History of changes

=item INSTALL

Example recipe for installing nagiosgraph

=item README

This file

=item TODO

A list of potential improvements to nagiosgraph

=item install.pl

Installation script

=item lib/insert.pl

Reads Nagios perfdata log and insert into RRD files

=item cgi/show.cgi

Generates an html page for the host/service specified

=item cgi/showconfig.cgi

Check the nagiosgraph configuration

=item cgi/showgraph.cgi

Generates the actual graph image used by other scripts

=item cgi/showgroup.cgi

Generates an html page for the group specified

=item cgi/showhost.cgi

Generates an html page for the host specified, showing all available services on the host

=item cgi/showservice.cgi

Generates an html page for the service specified, showing all hosts with that service

=item cgi/testcolor.cgi

Preview of colors for keywords in each color scheme

=item etc/access.conf

Access control file

=item etc/datasetdb.conf

Optional configuration for data sets

=item etc/nagiosgraph.conf

Primary configuration file for nagiosgraph

=item etc/nagiosgraph_*

Translations

=item etc/groupdb.conf

Configuration specific to showgroup.cgi

=item etc/hostdb.conf

Configuration specific to showhost.cgi

=item etc/servdb.conf

Configuration specific to showservice.cgi

=item etc/rrdopts.conf

Per-service options to rrdgraph

=item etc/map

Regular expression to identify services and specification for how to create RRD files

=item etc/ngshared.pm

Shared library of common perl subroutines

=item examples/*

Configuration examples

=item share/graph.gif

An icon for use in Nagios

=item share/nagiosgraph.css

CSS stylesheet

=item share/nagiosgraph.js

All of the JavaScript used by nagiosgraph

=item share/nagiosgraph.ssi

HTML for Nagios pages to enable graphs on mouseover

=item t/*

perl test scripts

=item utils/testentry.pl

A script for testing new map file entries

=item utils/flat2hier.pl

Script for converting RRD data from flat to hierarchy

=back



=head1 Sample Installation Layouts

Here are samples of nagiosgraph/nagios installation layouts.

separate, installed to /opt:

    /opt/nagios/bin/
    /opt/nagios/etc/
    /opt/nagios/include/
    /opt/nagios/libexec/
    /opt/nagios/perl/
    /opt/nagios/sbin/
    /opt/nagios/share/

    /opt/nagiosgraph/bin/insert.pl
    /opt/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/show.cgi
    /opt/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/showgraph.cgi
    /opt/nagiosgraph/etc/ngshared.pm
    /opt/nagiosgraph/etc/nagiosgraph.conf
    /opt/nagiosgraph/share/nagiosgraph.css
    /opt/nagiosgraph/share/nagiosgraph.js

overlay, installed to /usr/local/nagios:

    /usr/local/nagios/libexec/insert.pl
    /usr/local/nagios/sbin/show.cgi
    /usr/local/nagios/sbin/showgraph.cgi
    /usr/local/nagios/etc/ngshared.pm
    /usr/local/nagios/etc/nagiosgraph.conf
    /usr/local/nagios/share/nagiosgraph.css
    /usr/local/nagios/share/nagiosgraph.js

Debian

    /usr/lib/nagiosgraph/insert.pl
    /usr/lib/cgi-bin/nagiosgraph/show.cgi
    /usr/lib/cgi-bin/nagiosgraph/showgraph.cgi
    /etc/nagiosgraph/ngshared.pm
    /etc/nagiosgraph/nagiosgraph.conf
    /usr/share/nagiosgraph/htdocs/nagiosgraph.css
    /usr/share/nagiosgraph/htdocs/nagiosgraph.js

Redhat

    /usr/libexec/nagiosgraph/insert.pl
    /usr/lib/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/show.cgi
    /usr/lib/nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/showgraph.cgi
    /etc/nagiosgraph/ngshared.pm
    /etc/nagiosgraph/nagiosgraph.conf
    /usr/share/nagiosgraph/htdocs/nagiosgraph.css
    /usr/share/nagiosgraph/htdocs/nagiosgraph.js


=head1 Sample Web Server Configuration

Here are snippets from a typical (but basic) Apache server configuration.

    ScriptAlias /nagiosgraph/cgi-bin/ "/opt/nagiosgraph/cgi/"
    <Directory "/opt/nagiosgraph/cgi">
       Options ExecCGI
       AllowOverride None
       Order allow,deny
       Allow from all
    </Directory>
    Alias /nagiosgraph "/opt/nagiosgraph/share"
    <Directory "/opt/nagiosgraph/share">
       Options None
       AllowOverride None
       Order allow,deny
       Allow from all
    </Directory>
  
    ScriptAlias /nagios/cgi-bin "/opt/nagios/sbin"
    <Directory "/opt/nagios/sbin">
       Options ExecCGI
       AllowOverride None
       Order allow,deny
       Allow from all
    </Directory>
    Alias /nagios "/opt/nagios/share"
    <Directory "/opt/nagios/share">
       Options None
       AllowOverride None
       Order allow,deny
       Allow from all
    </Directory>


=head1 Platform Specific Notes

=head2 Nagios Embedded PERL (ePN)

The Nagios embedded PERL interpreter (ePN) does not understand every PERL
idiom.  In particular, it has problems with perldoc.  If you get errors
such as:

    ePN failed to compile /usr/lib/cgi-bin/nagios3/insert.pl: "Missing right
    curly or square bracket at (eval 1) line 45, at end of line syntax error
    at (eval 1) line 52, at EOF" at /usr/lib/nagios3/p1.pl line 250

then you must explicitly invoke PERL for insert.pl.  For example,
for batch processing use this:

    command_line /usr/bin/perl /usr/local/nagios/libexec/insert.pl

or for immediate processing use this:

    command_line /usr/bin/perl /usr/local/nagios/libexec/insert.pl "$LASTSERVICECHECK$||$HOSTNAME$||$SERVICEDESC$||$SERVICEOUTPUT$||$SERVICEPERFDATA$"



=head2 CentOS 5 and Nagiosgraph 0.9

    wget 'http://dag.wieers.com/rpm/packages/rrdtool/rrdtool-1.2.18-1.el5.rf.i386.rpm'
    wget 'http://dag.wieers.com/rpm/packages/rrdtool/perl-rrdtool-1.2.18-1.el5.rf.i386.rpm'
    wget 'http://dag.wieers.com/rpm/packages/rrdtool/rrdtool-devel-1.2.18-1.el5.rf.i386.rpm'
    wget 'http://mesh.dl.sourceforge.net/sourceforge/nagiosgraph/nagiosgraph-0.9.0.tgz'
    yum install -y libart_lgpl.i386
    rpm -hiv *rrdtool*.rpm

    tar xzvf nagiosgraph-0.9.0.tgz
    cd nagiosgraph-0.9.0
    mkdir /usr/local/nagios/nagiosgraph
    cp -r . /usr/local/nagios/nagiosgraph/
    mkdir /usr/local/nagios/nagiosgraph/rrd
    chmod go+rX /usr/local/nagios/nagiosgraph
    chown nagios /usr/local/nagios/nagiosgraph/rrd
    mkdir -p /var/spool/nagios
    touch /var/log/nagiosgraph.log /var/spool/nagios/perfdata.log
    chown nagios.apache /var/log/nagiosgraph.log /var/spool/nagios/perfdata.log
    chmod 664 /var/log/nagiosgraph.log
    chmod 644 /var/spool/nagios/perfdata.log

    ln -s /usr/local/nagios/nagiosgraph/nagiosgraph.conf /usr/local/etc/nagiosgraph.conf

    cp nagiosgraph.css /usr/local/nagios/share/stylesheets


=head2 MacOSX 10.5 and Nagios 2.12

Use the lib/insert.sh wrapper to ensure that perl is invoked properly.

    define command {
        command_name    process-service-perfdata
        command_line    /usr/local/nagios/libexec/insert.sh "$LASTSERVICECHECK$||$HOSTNAME$||$SERVICEDESC$||$SERVICEOUTPUT$||$SERVICEPERFDATA$"
    }


=head2 Fedora Core 6 and HTTP output parsing

The entry in the map file for HTTP does not work for Fedora core 6
with Nagios 2.6 and later.  This is what did work.

    # Service type: unix-www
    #   ouput:OK - HTTP/1.1 302 Found - 0.002 second response time |time=0.001920s;;;0.000000 size=126B;;;0
    /output:.*?HTTP.*?([.0-9]+) sec/
    and push @s, [ http,
        [ rt, GAUGE, $1 ] ];


=head1 Notes For Developers

The makefile rules control pretty much everything.  To create the makefile,

    perl Makefile.PL

Basic targets are the same as any MakeMaker perl module.

    make
    make test
    make install
    make clean
    make realclean

There are rules to build a source distribution, Debian, and Redhat packages.

    make dist                  creates nagiosgraph-x.y.z.tar.gz
    make deb-package           creates nagsiograph-x.y.z.deb
    make rpm-package           creates nagiosgraph-x.y.z.rpm

If you would like to contribute to nagiosgraph, there are a few things you
should do to make your life and the lives of the other nagiosgraph developers
easier.

=over

=item *

Please respect these design goals:

=over

=item 1.

do not break existing installations

=item 2.

minimize dependencies

=item 3.

keep it simple

=back

=item *

perlcritic

Run perlcritic and fix all warnings before you commit.  Be brutal:

    perlcritic -1 cgi/*.cgi
    perlcritic -1 etc/*.pm

or use the make rule to run them all:

    make critic

=item *

unit tests

Run the unit tests before modifying existing functionality.  Write unit
tests before you add code.

    make test

=item *

test coverage

To generate code coverage reports, install Devel::Cover then run tests:

    make test-coverage

This will generate a cover_db directory with code coverage metrics.

=item *

profiling

Use the perl profiler to see which parts of the code are taking most time.
Run the cgi script with DProf enabled, specifying args on the command line.

    perl -d:DProf cgi/show.cgi
    perl -d:DProf cgi/showgraph.cgi host=HOST service=SERVICE

Then view the profiling results.

    dprofpp

The bottlenecks are RRDs::graph (showgraph.cgi) and RRDs::info (show.cgi).
RRDs::info is invoked on each file in the rrd directory tree.  On a 1.4GHz
G4 PPC, getting info on 500 files takes about 0.2 seconds.

=item *

internationalization (i18n)

To get a list of all translated string constants, do the following:

    grep '_(' cgi/*.cgi etc/*.pm | sed -e 's/.*_(\([^)]*\).*/\1/' | sort -u
    grep '_(' share/*.js | sed -e 's/.*_(\([^)]*\).*/\1/' | sort -u

nagiosgraph uses a bare bones, home-grown, standalone implementation of
i18n.  If you add strings to the user interface or error handling, please
follow the pattern used for other strings in the code.  All translations
reside in a single file, with one file per language.  Each file is used
by the cgi (directly) and the javascript (via the cgi).

=item *

configurations

Be consistent in configuration files and documentation about where the
nagiosgraph files are installed, regardless of what you use.  Use the
standalone layout, with Nagios installed at /usr/local/nagios and
nagiosgraph installed at /usr/local/nagiosgraph

=item *

perldoc

You can preview the perldoc by doing the following:

    perldoc install.pl
    perldoc cgi/show.cgi
    perldoc etc/ngshared.pm

=back



=head1 Project Testing/Code Summary

Here are some project statistics as of 14feb12:

Number of unit tests: 1307
 
Test coverage:

                           stmt   bran   cond    sub    pod   time  total
 etc/ngshared.pm           82.5   77.3   67.4   91.6    0.0  100.0   77.0
 
Platforms on which unit tests have been run:
 
 os             arch      perl
 -------------------------------
 debian 5       ppc       5.10.0
 debian 6       i386,x64  5.10.1
 
Platforms on which installation has been tested:
 
 os             arch      method             nagios
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------
 debian 5       ppc       manual             3.2.0, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3
 debian 5       i386      deb                3.0.6
 ubuntu 10.04   i386,x64  deb, installer     3.2.0
 fedora 14      i386,x64  rpm, installer     3.2.3
 centos 5.5     i386      rpm, installer     3.2.3
 opensuse 11.3  i386      rpm, installer     3.2.1
 redhat 6       i386,x64  rpm, installer     3.2.3
 
The codebase looks like this:

  lines  words  bytes
    267    948   6974 cgi/export.cgi
    182    623   4987 cgi/show.cgi
    515   1447  12093 cgi/showconfig.cgi
    206    669   5245 cgi/showgraph.cgi
    194    709   5063 cgi/showgroup.cgi
    188    643   4986 cgi/showhost.cgi
    189    667   5021 cgi/showservice.cgi
    172    727   5344 cgi/testcolor.cgi
   3233  13606 113742 etc/ngshared.pm
     72    329   2162 lib/insert.pl
   5218  20368 165617 total
 
      177   353  2791 share/nagiosgraph.css
     1473  5251 42421 share/nagiosgraph.js
        1     3    75 share/nagiosgraph.ssi
     1651  5607 45287 total
 
     37    120   1087 t/01required_modules.t
   4139  11033 123394 t/02ngshared.t
    173    462   6351 t/03defaults.t
    161    509   4222 t/04show.t
    803   1983  25545 t/05permissions.t
   2270   3342  45556 t/06rules.t
   1529   2885  32559 t/07perfdata.t
   2111   4229  47498 t/09plugins.t
    232    620   7383 t/10backward.t
     31     84   1002 t/97pod.t
     20     73    608 t/98podcoverage.t
     18     71    591 t/99kwalitee.t
  11524  25411 295796 total
 
       32   163   879 etc/access.conf
       23    92   873 etc/datasetdb.conf
       63   249  2279 etc/groupdb.conf
       42   164  1446 etc/hostdb.conf
       92   255  1828 etc/labels.conf
      384  2291 15329 etc/nagiosgraph.conf
       52    81   793 etc/nagiosgraph_de.conf
       52    92   865 etc/nagiosgraph_es.conf
       52   102   935 etc/nagiosgraph_fr.conf
       20   119   660 etc/rrdopts.conf
       16    78   480 etc/servdb.conf
      256  1448  9863 etc/map
     1084  5134 36230 total

=cut

